---
layout: post
title: Tawang Tales
published: true
description: The real story of our 7-day trip to Tawang
keywords: Tawang, Dirang, Bomdilla, Bhalukpong, Bum La Pass, China, Tourist, travel, zoomcar, north-east, india
tags: life
disqus: y
share: y
---

---

**The Plan**

_"The time has come to escape somewhere. Somewhere remote, somewhere wild and beautiful at the sametime"._

This was all I could think of for the past few weeks and I would browse [tripadvisor](https://www.tripadvisor.in/) and other blogs for the perfect escape. I was confused.

_"Should I go alone or should I call my friends? It would be boring to go solo. But who would have the time and budget to make such a trip!"_

And I was nowhere near to finding a destination as well. As I was knocking around these thoughts in my mind, I got a call from [Appu](https://plus.google.com/101526879864814957864). Appu is a guy who doesn't do the usual chit-chat. He gets staright to the point. 

_"Shall we go to north-east, Aslam?"_, he asked. Oh boy! You know, when what you are searching for findes you, it brings a special joy. I told him, I was also making a plan. He said that we just have to fix the dates, book the tickets and the rest we can plan along the way. The game was on. Other heads started popping in. It turned out that every one was exhausted by the dreaded office life and they all dreamt of a break. The NE trip whatsapp group was born. [Sajeev](https://www.facebook.com/619aswin), [Prasad](https://www.facebook.com/ashwin.prasad.54), [Kartha](https://www.facebook.com/vipinvkartha), [Deepu](https://www.facebook.com/deepuc1) and [Sebastian](https://www.facebook.com/sebastianthom) joined the trip. So many of our common friends had already visited places in north-east India. The amazing [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ix6MUQ31j9k) they made became one of our many inspirations to go to north-east. There were so many choices in north-east ranging from Gangtok, Chirapunji, Meghalaya and the list goes on.

_"Boys, Let's go to Gangtok. Plan later, book the tickets first before the rates go sky high."_, said Appu. We obliged. After carfeul consideration of available dates, we booked flight tickets to [Guwahati Airport](https://www.google.co.in/maps/place/Lokpriya+Gopinath+Bordoloi+International+Airport/@26.1064727,91.5860468,15z/data=!4m2!3m1!1s0x0:0x69ba1fb4e82844d8?sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwj2gM3pgOXTAhUMso8KHQhZA5MQ_BIIgAEwCg). The dates were from Apr 29 to May 7. All of us booked the cheapest flights (SpiceJet, ofcourse!) and started looking for itenaries to Gangtok. Meanwhile, I started calling travel groups to get an estimate about how much the travel would cost each of us. My calculations put me at 25,000 INR per person for 7 days including airfare. We had already booked the tickets, and there was no going back. So the planning continued. 

_"Hey have you heard of Tawang and Sela pass? It is a remote place, and very beautiful too. Check it out!"_. As soon as Kartha mentioned Tawang, the group came alive. The words, **Tawang, the Hidden Paradise**, instantly caught my attention. It is not as famous as the other tourist spots, which means lesser tourists, more freedom. There is a chance of finding snow in Sela Pass, which is on the way to Tawang. Everyone started digging up photos and itineraies for Tawang. Everyone except Sebastian maybe. If I remember properly, he was ok with anything as long as we were all going. So, Tawang it was. 

Now the next cruicial element of the trip, the instrument of transport. It was **rent a bike** Vs **rent a cab** Vs **self-drive car**. The **rent a cab** option quickly went out of the window. Incidentally, one of our friends had already gone to Tawang. He shared with us the pictures of Dirang Valley and the wonderful condition of the roads and hairpins that lay ahead. He warned us that self-driving is dangerous and tedious. Even their cabdriver was having a tough time. The warning had the reverse effect. Everyone took it as a challenge to ride the roads, rather than to sit in the back of some stranger's car. And the **rent a bike** option was crossed out, since most of us were better at driving cars than riding bikes. So we booked a Mahindra Scorpio from ZoomCar for 7 days. They recently started out in Guwahati, so it was the perfect timing for us. We didn't prebook any hotels. Sajeev and myself were not so happy with that decision, but after a sarcastic lecture from Appu on how overplanning ruins the fun of a trip, we gave in. It turned out to be the right decision.

---

**Day Zero- Apr 28, 2017**

Did I forget to mention the Inner Line Permit (ILP)? I guess I did. ILP is mandatory in many places in north-east. Because these are border areas with a lot of army presence. I read in some [blogs](https://thelazytravellersnews.wordpress.com/2015/05/24/arunchal-pradesh-tawang-darshan-inner-line-permit-and-bumla-pass-process/) that getting them offline in the Guwahati office can be a bit of a hassle. So we opted for the [online](http://arunachalilp.com/) application. The online application costs 100 INR per head and the offline only 10 INR. It takes a few days, but you will get it. Additional to the ILP, we also took a copy of an ID-proof. 

>Free advice: Let me tell you in advance that one copy is not enough. Take 4-5 copies of ID-proof and 2 copies of ILP if you are planning to visit BumLa Pass. The additional ID-proof copies may come handy when you are booking the hotel in Tawang.

Sebastian and Prasad had come to my place in Bangalore. Appu should also have joined us, but he preferred to stay with his friends in mysore. His buddies there were planning to go to Nandi Hills on bike, so they dropped Appu on the way. He later regretted that decision, because he lost all his sleep. The four of us had straight flights ahead from Bangalore airport to Guwahati airport. Sajeev and Deepu were to fly in from Chennai Airport with a stop in Kolkata. Poor Guys! They were the first ones to reach Guwahati and grabbing the Scorpio from ZoomCar was their duty. Kartha was to fly in from Pune and land at the sametime as the Bangalore bunch. With a last check on our back packs, we flew off to Guwahati.

---

**Day One - Apr 29, 2017**

For a change, the Spice Jet flights arrived on time. Guwahati Airport was neither well maintained nor large as its Bangalore counterpart. It had a parking lot the size of two Basket Ball courts. All of us took our backpacks and grabbed a seat in the nearest KFC. No, we didn't have KFC for breakfast. We were just waiting for Sajeev and Deepu to come and pick us up in the Scorpio. An hour passed, waiting for them. Meanwhile we took out our cameras and inspected them. Sebastian had brought a digital Nikon. That camera had a mind of its own. From time to time it would zoom in and out. Plus, the capture button was too stubborn. It would not work no matter how hard I pressed. Deepu had also brought a camera. It was an oldie, but still functioned properly. Fortunately, Deepu and Appu had Iphones. So that would suffice. 

It was almost 10.30 am. Finally they came with the Scorpio, a mighty blue beast. We hoped on and the first thing that we did was check the fuel and tyre pressure. Deepu was the navigator and Sajeev was the driver. We set the destination to Bhalukpong and drove on. None of us had eaten anything and were extremely hungry. We looked for hotels on the highway, but couldn't find anything decent. The view along the road reminded me of Kerala. There were a lot of green pastures, paddy fields and small hills. However Guwahati didn't have the one thing Kerala has, an amplitude of hotels along the highway. Finally we settled for a small hotel. There was no menu as such.There was only Poori and Sabji. That become our brunch. Two hours into the trip and I realised that sitting in the back of the Scorpio is a pain in the ass. So we decided to stop here-and-there and shift places and the driver.

There are some tourist places in Guwahati, temples mostly. We didn't stop at any of those places because we wanted to reach Bhalkupong before sunset. The road ahead was in good condition. We didn't face any traffic. We did get a bit lost when we tried for a detour near tezpur. The detour took us through a small village. We were a bit surprised. It looked exactly like a village you would see in Alleppy. We even saw a grandma coming out of church in traditional kerala christian attire. Someone in the back asked, _"Did we loose our way and end up in Keralam?"_. The similarities were that close. Even the shops and markets resemebled that of Kerala from 2000s. We passed a lot of schools on the way. Most of them had white uniforms with senior girls wearing white sarees. Pretty soon we got back on the Highway and stopped for a cup of tea. The tea session quickly turned into a mini-banquet with everyone ordering biriyani, fried rice and even soup. 

>Free advice: the hotels may say they take cards for payment, but the GPRS signal may be too low that they won't work. So carry a good amount of liquid cash.

All along the way we talked on and on about our office lives and college days. Many memories were refereshed and I think that is the best thing about going in a trip with collegemates. There was one memory of our friend that stood out. Let's call him X. X was a charming intellectual with an extreme appetitie for sleep. X always makes it through the exams somehow. Like every other engineering student, it is the late night combine study that helps all of us, including X. It was the internal exams time. It counts for 50 marks at the University. This time it was Maths for our branch. All of us prepped well, digested the formulas and marched onto the examination hall. In the examination hall, students are seated so that no one from the same branch sits close to each other. Also the branch will be split into groups and placed in different examination halls. It so happened that X was the only one from our branch in his examination hall. He didn't mind. We finished our exams, went back to the hostel and started discussing the paper. As were discussing, X stepped in and started listening to the answers. X started panicking, he didn't get any of the answers that we got. After a few minutes, he started saying that none of the questions we mentioned were in his paper. We also got confused. That is when it struck all of us. X had written the physics paper of another branch. The whole two hours of the exam, X gladly sat there, attempted all the questions, handed over the answer sheet to the examiner, walked away confidently and never realized that it was not the Maths paper. Oh man, you should have seen the look on X's face. He immidietly went to the Maths department to see our professor. The entire department burst into laughter. Our professor only had to say the following, _"In my 25 years of teaching experience, I have never seen or heard such an incident ever happening."_. He got away with it and got his retest. This is one memory that still makes all of us laugh till our cheekbones hurt. The only reason, I am not revealing the identity of X is because if he gets pissed, he might hack this blog of mine. 

I am sorry, I think I got carried away. So where were we? Yes, I was in the driving seat with sixty kms left to Bhalukpong. I must say I was lucky. I got the best road with zero traffic. There was dense forest on both sides and a smooth road ahead with the yellow evening sunlight shining upon us. As I was speeding along, we glanced a small river on our right side. We decided to take a stop and have a look. We couldn't find a way to the banks of the river. Appu and myself spoke to the local children and they showed us the way. The river bank was layed with beautiful stones, almost looked like a scene from [NPCB](https://twitter.com/npcbmovie/status/493634214860840960). It was a part of the Kameng river that went on to join the Brahmaputra. We snapped some pics and continued the journey. We reached Bhalukpong checkpost. This is the first place where we had to show the ILP of each passenger. The army men just had a quick glance through the paperwork and passed us through. I spoke to a senior army man, asking him for hotels nearby. He told me he was posted there only the day before and didn't much about the area. He did tell us, why the place was called 'Bhalukpong'. It has something to do with bears (Bhalu is bear in hindi) coming over from the forest for a drink. 

We got a nice deal at a lodge, Hotel Tazi Yangste. As we were settling down, we met with our next surprise. I saw Kartha and Sajeev talking with some of our batchmates from our [college](http://tkmce.ac.in/). We knew their team had gone a week before to Tawang, but we never imagined seeing them along the way. [Vishnu](https://www.facebook.com/vishnu.gopakumar.39), [Shahanshah](https://www.facebook.com/shahanshahs), [Potti](https://www.facebook.com/sreehari.varma.311) and [Sreeram](https://www.facebook.com/sreerampr.ala) had all gone in rented bikes. What freaked me out, was their costumes - jacket upon jacket with thermals inside, gloves on the hands and gum boots on their legs. They were in a hurry and very quickly they gave a brief summary of Tawang and the road ahead to BumLa. Their tips really helped us. The good news was that there was snow at the top, but they warned us that getting to the top in a four wheeler may be not allowed by the army, if there is heavy snow. We bid them farewell and settled down at the hotel after having some delicious chicken momos. We tucked in early since we wanted to leave early in the morning.

---

***Day Two - Apr 30, 2017**

I somehow woke up at 4.30 am in the morning. The plan was to leave at 5:00 am sharp because the destination was Tawang and there were plenty of bad roads ahead. I was surprised to see that sun was already up by 5:00 am. I had heard about the demand for a separate timezone for north-eastern states. Only now did it make sense to me. All of us had decided the earlier night that we will rotate the seating position every one hour. It was almost 6 am when we departed from Bhalukpong. Sajeev started the drive as usual. The river Kameng was by our side and offered some beautiful scenery. Every few kilometers we could see JCBs and Bull Dozers parked on the side, ready for maintenance. A landslide can occur any time and block the roads. Deepu had informed us that the day before we arrived in Guwahati, there was a violent storm that caused a lot of damage. Most of the bridges we passed were made of steel and can only pass one vehicle at a time. If we see any other vehicle coming in from the distance we have to honk them and let them know we are coming. Right after Sajeev, when Prasad took over the driving, we had to stop our Scorpio for nearly 5 mins to let an array of army trucks pass. 

We stopped for breakfast in the nearest tea stall we saw. There is a minimum waiting period of half an hour after you place the order, since it takes longer to cook in the higher altitudes. While things were cooking, I had a chat with a young teenage boy. 

_"Hi there, we are from Kerala."_.  He seemed very happy to see South Indians. I asked his name, but can't recollect it now.

_"So which tribe do you belong to?"_

He said, _"I am from Nimji Tribe, but most people living here are from Akho Tribe. Each tribe has its own language and we don't understand each other."_ 

_"So is it true that there are more than 200 languages spoken in the entire North-East?"_

He laughed at me and said,_"200 may be only the accounted number. There must be a lot. Even I don't know the exact number."_

By this time, his younger sister came out. When I asked her name, she gave a toothless smile and hid behind her brother. I was about to leave, when he gave me his facebook id and asked me to add him. I chuckled and said, _"Ya ya. Sure. Bye bye!"_

Our order had arrived; hot Maggie plus tea.It tasted good and we left. The road upto Bomdilla was fine, but after that we saw the worst roads ever. The parts of the roads where maintenance is going on is filled with dirt, three inches thick. The parts where road tarring is going on, was full of dust and bumps. It took nearly 2 hours for us to get onto some freshly serviced road. It felt like heaven. For lunch again, we stopped at small stall. These stalls are held by bamboo sticks on the mountain side. The whole building distributes its weight through these sticks. We could literally see the deep cliff from holes on the wooden floor. As we sat admiring the engineering of the building, Maggie noodles and tea arrived for a second time. Kartha, Deepu and Sajeev wanted to try something different. They ordered Chicken Tukpa, which is actually noodles in their native style. 

>Free advice: Don't order Tukpa.

Along the way we could see a lot of army stations. Each unit has its own name and purpose. Photography in these areas is prohibited and there are speed brakers along the road to make sure that we drive slow. These stations are well maintained and we can approach these army men for any help we need. Also to point out that among the few ATMs that we saw along the road, most were situated near to one of these army stations. By evening, we had reached Dirang. We were running low on fuel. We took the Scorpio to the nearest petrol pump. Since we rented the vehicle from ZoomCar, the fuel bills will be reimbursed. However we need printed bills from the pump for reimbursement. This small little pump was out of printing paper. After a few minutes of discussion, we pumped diesel worth 500 INR, took the manual bill and left. Something is better than nothing. 

It was almost 4:30 pm, but the sunlight had nearly gone out. Thick fog was starting to set in. Appu was driving and was having a hard time seeing the road. The foglights and indicators were turned on. To the left of the road were sharp ridges, which was clouded by the fog. As we slowly made our way through the fog, tiny dots began to against the front window frame. It was not waterdrops. Then we began to hear the sound of particles hitting the car. For a moment we were worried, was it hailstones, but it was not that hard or big. It was snow!

_"Look outside man, it's snowfall"_, 
exclaimed everyone. We lowered the side window panels and saw actual snowfall. Everyone was excited and joyous, because it was a first time experience for everyone. It lasted only for a couple of minutes and then the fog cleared. Everything was back to normal. From a far distance, we saw the 'Welcome to Tawang' gate and we knew we had reached Sela Pass. We parked the car and all of us posed for a group picture. There were sheets of snow lying around and it was too cold. At the moment, I was wearing my casual clothes. Very soon my hands and feet started to ache and I had to switch to shoes, gloves and a jacket. We shut all the windows and turned the A/C knob towards the warm side. That was the first time, I used that option in a vehicle. We rotated our seats and Kartha climbed onto the driver seat. Sunlight was fading away. It also started to shower a little and we still had more than 70 kms to cover to reach Tawang. To make things worse, the condition of the road was that of a battlefield. We knew that the next town ahead was Jang. We decided that if we find any lodge in Jang we shall spend the night there. It was 7:00 pm when we reached Jang. We found a lodge, but the owner said that if you drive for one more hour you will be able to reach Tawang. By this time, the battery of almost all phones were down and there was limited network. Fortunately Sebastian had downloaded the offline map in his phone and he was getting the GPS signal as well. So he became our navigator in the dark of the night. 

We drove on, climbing hairpin after hairpin with no humanbeing in the nearsight. We found a building with lights on. It turned out to be a Paying Guest House. Appu and myself got out of the car and went inside. We were greeted by a chubby little man. 

_"Namaste, where are you from?"_, He came out with his hands folded. We introduced ourselves and explained our situation.

_"Nothing to worry. Rooms are available. For seven people, you will need two rooms. One room will cost you 2500. And you guys want to go to the Monastery and visit BumLa, right? I can arrange that. I am the philosophy teacher here at the Monastery."_
He was very polite and we continued to converse for a few more minutes. I wanted to take the rooms. But he mentioned that if we were to go forward four-five kilometers, we would reach Tawang main town. _"There are lodges there as well"_. We decided to try it out and come back to his place, if we didn't get anything. 

As we went ahead, we started seeing more building lights. It was a relaxing sight. We have been driving the whole day, starting from 6:00 am in the morning. Everyone was tired. Once we reached the main town, we knocked and enquired at a couple of lodges. We finally took two rooms in Shampala Hotel for just 2000 INR. Also all the restaurants had closed down at that hour. Luckily our Hotel manager mentioned that something should be available at their sister hotel. I went to check. It was completely locked from the outside. I had to knock at their door for a few minutes beofre a boy came out. Only chowmein was available, so I placed order for seven Chicken chowmein. I promised to comeback in half an hour and went to the room. The rooms were not centrally heated. This meant that the bed and blankets were ice cold. We had to lie down and use our body heat to make them sleepable. Someone brought the food from the sister hotel. Sadly, instead of seven there was only five. We shared the food, filled our tummys and creeped into the bed. Never before had I eaten noodles three times in a day!

---

***Day Three - May 01, 2017**


---